---
layout: post
title: Hello, World!
---

Greetings!  My name's Caroline, and I'm a member of the Stanford class of 2019 planning to study [Symbolic Systems](https://symsys.stanford.edu/ssp_description) with a concentration in Artificial Intelligence.  A few important things you should know about me –

**1. I care deeply about making CS accessible to people from all backgrounds.**  My first experience with computer science was attending the first Code Camp run by [Girls Teaching Girls To Code](http://www.girlsteachinggirlstocode.org) as a sophomore in high school, and I had a blast!  Quite frankly, had I not participated in the program, I might not have ever realized how easy to learn or how fun coding is.

Fast forward to freshman year – when I got an email calling for GTGTC Code Camp mentors, I immediately signed up!  No way was I going to pass up the opportunity to give back to the organization which had started my journey in tech.  As part of the web design track team, I developed a simple personal website template for our curriculum materials (learning HTML & CSS myself along the way) and co-taught the basics of web dev during our track sessions.  Watching the dozens of girls in the classroom light up as they programmed their way from stark HTML-only pages to rich, beautiful websites was definitely the highlight and most rewarding part of my experience.

Still, as much as my time mentoring was fantastic, I still wasn't quite satisfied.  One disquieting detail from the event stuck out to me in particular – the vast majority of participants were high-achieving white or Asian-American girls who attended fantastic public or private high schools, and very few were girls of color or students from under-resourced school districts.  I knew I wanted to change that.  As a result, soon after Code Camp, I joined the organization's leadership as a member of the high school outreach team.  When our team met for the first time in May, I was excited to find out that all of us were thinking along the same lines, and we soon decided our core priority would be diversifying GTGTC's participant demographic.  I'm proud to say that this year, not only will our team be working with high school liaisons to plan events (as it traditionally has in the past), but we'll be teaching regular programming workshops at traditionally underserved schools!

**2. I get really excited about getting creative with code!  In fact, I view coding as fundamentally creative.**  I went to my first hackathon, TreeHacks, in February 2016 and have been hooked on building personal/group projects from then onward!  (And by extension, hooked on hackathons – PennApps XIV will soon be my 8th!)  My team had very little experience with coding at the time but a lot of enthusiasm about metafiction and games, so we ended up developing [a psychological thriller told through the medium of a sketchy Whatsapp knockoff](http://devpost.com/software/project-underline) with MIT App Inventor.  While it might not have been the most technically complex project (App Inventor uses a beginner-friendly visual block-based language), the game was immensely fun to conceive and build, especially as my first project which wasn't a set-in-stone, theory-heavy assignment.  That exhilarating feeling of transforming imagination into reality has stuck with me ever since.

Some of the projects I've worked on have been utterly ridiculous, like [a website that provides historical weather information to help you plan your trip to the past](http://devpost.com/software/time-traveling-for-dummies) or [a demon-infested note-taking app which takes users' souls through in-app purchases](http://devpost.com/software/notes-a9du4v).  Others have attempted to tackle problems big and small, like [an app that coordinates roommate sleeping schedules](https://github.com/carolineh101/AlarmMate) or [a virtual "comfort box" web app that assists people who experience anxiety or depression](https://github.com/ischang/ComfortBox).  But all of them involved programming with the mindset of an artist: dreaming up a novel concept (whether by myself or on a team) and taking the plunge to bring it to life.

**3. I believe that technology benefits enormously from perspectives from different fields.**  The reason I'm planning to major in Symbolic Systems rather than Computer Science is that it provides as much technical depth as the CS major while also integrating ways of thinking from the fields of philosophy, psychology, and linguistics.  After all, how can you fully understand, let alone make breakthroughs in artificial intelligence without first pondering the nature of consciousness, considering cognitive neuroscience, or poring over the intricacies of language?

Charles Darwin couldn't have comprehended the world-shattering reality of evolution without [drawing from the literary mode of thought](http://www.victorianweb.org/science/darwin/darwin7.html).  Albert Einstein couldn't have formed the elegant theory of general relativity without [inspiration from music](http://www.nytimes.com/2006/01/31/science/a-genius-finds-inspiration-in-the-music-of-another.html?_r=0).  And Ada Lovelace couldn't have envisioned the vast possibilities of computer science [without her "poetical" imagination](https://www.brainpickings.org/2014/12/10/ada-lovelace-walter-isaacson-innovators/).  The best ideas don't come from programming while surrounded by engineers in an ~~ivory~~ silicon tower – they come from engaging with the world around you.

Speaking of interdisciplinarity, it may interest you to know that I was inspired to create this blog by an English class I took on Victorian science and literature!  Studying Darwin in his historical context, a time when authors of fiction were writing like scientists and scientists were writing like authors of fiction, got me thinking about his dedication to reaching out and being accessible to broad audiences.  It's something I really admire and hope to emulate.  So with writing as well as programming, I guess I'll just take the plunge, get creative, and start now.
