---
layout: post
title: Hackathons 101
---

I just returned from [PennApps XIV](http://2016f.pennapps.com), and I had an absolutely fantastic time!  Over the course of 36 hours, my teammate [Nishanth](https://github.com/nishanthrs) and I built [hospital.ity](http://devpost.com/software/hospital-ity), an iOS chatbot that makes the process of retrieving personal health and medical information accessible to anyone.  The project has definitely been one of my favorites to create – as someone fascinated by AI, it was exciting to dip my toes in the water by learning how to use [wit.ai](https://wit.ai/) to train the app's natural language processing (NLP) model!

As I mentioned in my [previous post](https://carolineh101.github.io/blog/Hello-World/), I'm passionate about hacking – participating in hackathons was the catalyst to my decision to pursue a career in tech.  There's just something incredibly satisfying about buckling down and creating something entirely new over the course of a weekend, and I think it's something anyone even remotely interested in computer science should experience at least once.  That being said, I've heard too many people write themselves off as too inexperienced before they even try one out – a sentiment with which I definitely relate.

Walking into TreeHacks last February with barely any coding experience outside of class, I instantly felt overwhelmed. *Github accounts?  APIs?  The MEAN stack?  IoT?*  It seemed like everyone around me was speaking a secret language meant only for "real" developers, and I suddenly started dreading the moment when I'd have to tell someone that my team would be programming with a block-based coding tool designed for beginners.  But when the moment came and I sheepishly admitted to another far more experienced hacker that I was creating an Android psychological thriller game with MIT App Inventor, instead of immediately turning up his nose as I'd expected, he said, "Wow, that sounds really cool!", no judgment or condescension at all in his tone.  *Huh*, I thought.  *Maybe I do belong here after all.*

Eight hackathons later and here I am, deeply glad that I didn't miss out on my new favorite activity by sprinting out the door in an imposter syndrome-fueled panic that night.  So, to anyone even remotely considering going to a hackathon for the first time, here's my two cents on the topic:

**1. Get to know your fellow hackers.**  Making new friends is definitely one of the best parts of attending a hackathon – where else are you going to find so many people who get so excited about making things that they're willing to stay up for 24+ hours to do so?  Whether you're sharing your project ideas with other attendees, receiving advice from upperclassmen about studying tech-related fields, laughing along with another team over your shared struggle to finish your projects in the final few minutes of hacking, or taking a midnight pizza break with your teammates, you'll definitely get more out of the experience than if you just keep your head down and focus on coding.

And another word about meeting people – never be afraid to go to a hackathon by yourself!  Most hackathons offer team-building events, and chances are, there are plenty of people who are a) in the exact same position as you and b) perfectly willing to work with beginners.  I actually met my teammate at PennApps when I stepped off the train from the airport to UPenn, noticed a boy with only a backpack on, and (not knowing where to go) asked him whether he was going to the hackathon.  Fast forward a few minutes later, and Nishanth and I were talking up a storm about our previous projects and our hopes for PennApps!  At first, I was wary when I found out he was planning to build a chatbot for iOS since I didn't know the first thing about NLP or Objective-C, but soon after discovering we shared the belief that hackathons are for learning, I realized my inexperience didn't matter for us.  Ultimately, we ended up working together very well!

So go ahead – strike up a conversation with the person sitting next to you at the opening ceremony.  Chat with someone with an interesting pitch at team formation.  Ask the team the next table over about what they're building.  Talk to the other hackers in the expo hall when you're finished demoing.  You won't regret it.

**2. Make full use of your resources and get ready to learn!**  Entering a hackathon with only one CS class under your belt (or even zero) might seem like a terrifying prospect, but don't be intimidated by the technical jargon flying around you or the hyper-focused team next door which seems to be programming at the speed of light.  No idea what to build or how to code?  No problem – just participate in a beginner workshop or look through the online tutorials which will almost always be offered at the event!  From web development to app creation to APIs, these resources will have you up and running in no time with the start of a potential project.

When I entered HackOverflow last spring, I was sorely tempted to go the safe route and build another app with MIT App Inventor, but when I found out that a volunteer was running an Android Studio workshop, I decided to take the risk and create something with an entirely new technology.  Within 30 minutes, I'd learned the basics of coding an Android app (finally, I knew how to use Java outside of an academic setting!), and I came out determined to learn the rest through trial and error.  For my project, I chose to focus more on creativity than technical complexity since I was a complete beginner, and (with plenty of help from documentation and StackOverflow) I ended up building a text-based escape-the-rooms game requiring out-of-the-box thinking to solve.  (For example, players had to edit a seemingly uneditable room number to the next room number based on a clue asking them to change the room themselves).  The risk paid off – [Escape](https://github.com/carolineh101/Escape) (to my great surprise) won Best Overall at the hackathon, and more importantly, I had added another technology under my belt!  You don't have to come in as an expert to create something cool.

Going back to my first point, though, remember that that your greatest resource is the people around you!  Don't be afraid to ask questions when you're stuck or confused, no matter how "stupid" they might sound in your head – your teammates will be happy to help you out, whether teaching you how to use a new framework (many thanks to team [Dandelion](https://github.com/ischang/ComfortBox) for introducing me to Bootstrap) or looking over a frustrating bug.  Speaking of bugs, hackathons generally have mentors to help you with any technical problems you might be struggling with, so use them!  One hour before hacking ended at PennApps, my teammate and I were panicking about an error in our JSON parsing that we hadn't been able to fix for *hours*.  After realizing we were getting nowhere with the problem, we contacted a mentor on Slack, and within a few minutes he had identified and solved the issue in our code!  You never have to go the lone wolf route at a hackathon.

In conclusion, my advice for you potential hackers sums up to three words: *Just. Do. It.*  Every one of the experienced hackers you see today started out as a nervous beginner, and they only got to where they are now because they decided to jump in and learn by doing.  So sign up for that hackathon – I can promise you, there's nothing quite like the feeling of coming in with nothing and coming out having built something of your very own.
